We Begin the day with the question are
we any closer to a ceasefire in Gaza
according to the US Secretary of State
the answer is yes and only one thing is
standing in the way the militant group
Hamas Hamas which is regarded by many
countries as a terrorist organization
reportedly reacted positively to the
proposal backed by the US for a truce
but now it's asking for changes many of
those changes blinkin says are a nogo
the secretary of state is in Qatar to
drum up support for the initiative aside
from what Hamas wants to amend this plan
has still not received a clear public
endorsement from Israel this stands in
stark contrast to the UN Security
Council on Monday the council endorsed
the plan calling on both Israel and
Hamas to enact it immediately with no
conditions well tonight the world is
still waiting for that to
happen and here's a primer on what the
plan that for now has unprecedented
international support would call for
let's take a look at it it's made up of
three phases the first phase would
include the release of some hostages the
return of Palestinian prisoners and
partial troop withdrawal all of this
under a six week truce the second phase
includes a permanent ceasefire now that
would mean the full withdrawal of
Israeli forces from the Gaza Strip the
third phase would focus on a plan to
rebuild
Gaza while blinkin have said that some
of the counter proposals from Hamas are
unacceptable we we still have no
information on what those amendments
call for here's more now from Anthony
blinkin the entire
world almost without uh fail has been uh
behind this proposal and we've heard it
again and again and again so we were
waiting on one response and that was the
response from
Hamas and as the Prime Minister said
last night we received a response
Hamas has proposed numerous changes to
the proposal that was on the table we
discussed those changes last night with
Egyptian colleagues and today with the
Prime Minister some of the changes are
workable some are
not I'm joined Now by Jonathan panikov
he's one of the leading Middle East
analysts at the Atlantic Council that's
a us-based global Affairs think T
Jonathan it's good to have you back on
the show when you and I spoke 24 hours
ago
you were cautious about what seemed to
be growing optimism that this plan would
be the plan leading to peace I have to
say it's very preent of you Hamas hasn't
signed on and it wants the plans changed
what do you say about what's
happened thanks for having me back
thrill to be with you look I think it's
a challenge and I think there's not a
lot of surprise frankly by Israel or the
us or the Europeans that this was the re
response this was a yes but and the
question is how big is the butt so is
this a poison pill which would mean that
Hamas isn't really looking for this to
end up and conclude in a deal and so
what they've put back in the Amendments
they've proposed are so extreme that
they know Israel won't agree to it or is
it going to be as secretary blinkin said
just an opening negotiating position
such that some of the changes are
workable and might be able to be
accepted and some of them are just not
but Hamas might ultimately let them drop
I think it's a little too early still to
say but I wouldn't expect Israel to sign
off or even agree to anything until
Hamas makes the first move and makes
clear what they will and won't accept
yeah let's consider for a moment the
decision-making process within Hamas you
told me yesterday that everything the
group agrees to or rejects depends on
the Gaza based Hamas leader Yaya senoir
what makes this man who does not take
part in any negotiations because he is
hiding somewhere in Gaza what makes him
the only important decision
maker so sinir is The Mastermind behind
the October 7th attack he is the
political leader in Gaza um but
ultimately has control of the brigades
as well the reality is that Hamas
leaders sitting in
Doha mes don't actually have the ability
to Kajol or command the the brigades the
terror side of Hamas to make a decision
to agree to a deal or not agree to a
deal sinir does Hamas as a terrorist
organization as a whole has a variety of
factions the political faction in doigh
just mentioned the political faction in
Gaza faction that's really there and
signed up to Hamas simply to be able to
work and to be able to get money and and
living expenses and then a faction
that's incred militant that is the
brigades and the ones that carried out
the October 7th attack sinir is the only
one that can actually have authority
over all of them and so at the end of
the day no matter what everybody else
wants it's going to be his decision yeah
yeah I mean we often think of Hamas is
being this one big monolith I'm
wondering is there a dispute within
Hamas about the future course or is
everyone without exception behind Sino
war no I don't think everybody's behind
him I just think a lot of people don't
have sufficient what you'd say is Wasa
to oppose him sufficient influence to
oppose Sino so I I think there's
actually a number of splits and a number
of ideological splits within the group a
number of differences in terms of
preferences of what different leaders if
they were in his position might do but
the truth of the matter is he has
control now if he were to be killed by
the Israelis or assassinated then it
might open up space ironically it could
change things as you have different
leaders battling but right now he's the
man in charge Anthony blinkin said today
that the present agreement that's on the
table is virtually identical to a
proposal that Hamas put forward itself
over a month ago but today they come
back and make further demands I mean
this sounds like it looks like a delay
tactic um how is that in hamas's
interest
well you're right it is and obviously
some of that would depend on what are
and if they're about the timetable then
it really it's showing that Hamas isn't
interested we have very clear reporting
now um from another Outlet of sinar's
comments about frankly using the
Palestinian people that the more
civilians you die it's ultimately
beneficial for Kamas propaganda I think
in the saddest of forms you're seeing
the impact of that and that come to life
that the focus is on the group the focus
is on sinir himself and his survival and
so for the brigades it makes sense
because if there's a resolution to the
conflict or the conflict ends at least I
should say well then sino's Powers
probably going to be diminished there's
not going to be a Hamas leading Gaza
right now though the opposite seems to
be true as you're saying he's delaying
and that keeps him as the person in the
driver's seat yeah and you know what
you're talking talking about um this
report The Wall Street Journal they they
published leaked messages from sinir
which in which he calls the deaths of
Palestinian civilians necessary
sacrifices and he says quote we have the
Israelis right where we want them so
yeah that doesn't sound like um a leader
who wants a ceasefire deal I want to ask
you about Qatar Qatar has been
conducting these ceasefire negotiations
for months now the qari Prime Minister
described the process today as
frustrating
um what would happen if Qatar gave up
its role as
mediator well my guess is what you would
probably have is the Egyptians stepping
back in but we saw a couple of weeks ago
that didn't go so well the last round of
negotiations ended largely because of
contentions um that Egypt was not
negotiating as a mediator perhaps in the
best form it was giving different drafts
to the Israelis than to Hamas I'm
skeptical that Qatar really is going to
step out I think they view for their own
foreign policy frankly Global and
Regional
mediation as a key tenant of what they
want to be known for of what Doha wants
to be known for throughout the world but
there's no doubt that you got officials
in Cutter that are extraordinarily
frustrated at this point and John let me
ask you before we run out of time lesper
just pretend for a moment that the Rifts
can be bridged and that a a ceasefire
agreement can be reached reached does it
make sense to go into such a a a
ceasefire without a plan for the day
after the war in
Gaza it doesn't make sense but that may
be where we are look there's a lot of
plans out there a lot of think tanks um
and individuals associated with think
tanks including the Atlanta Council have
people who have proposed plans or
involved in um various behind the scenes
non-governmental engagement ments about
developing plans I I think the US
governments and a number of European
allies some key tenants that are clear
about what needs to happen um but it's
true there's going to be a lot of
questions about security about the
humanitarian recovery effort about
reconstruction about governance that
right now are just unknown and we're
going to have to see how they come to
fruition I think the US has been so
focused maybe rightly on just getting to
a place where we can even have a
ceasefire so that conversation is
possible Jonathan panikov with the
Atlantic Council Jonathan we appreciate
you taking the time to talk with us
again tonight we appreciate your
analysis thank
you thank you